on april 5th 1975
a conference entitled the central
intelligence agency
and world peace was held in new haven
connecticut on the campus of yale
university
from one of the afternoon workshops of
the conference kirkpatrick sale
author of the book sds discusses
cia domestic operations aimed against
the political left
within the united states he also
explores
cia connections with yale university
and the academic community in general
kirkpatrick sale
i'd like to bring up several parts of
the cia's domestic operations
it seems to me particularly fitting that
we should be talking about
the cia and its domestic operations here
at yale university as you all know it is
the spiritual
wellspring for most of the cia's
activities and certainly for its
ideology uh
at least a quarter of the top people of
the cia
have come from these distinguished halls
william buckley
as you know a one of
yale's most notorious graduates william
sloane coffin
also in the cia who was
the chaplain here cord meyer who is the
uh chief of station now in london and
the architect of much of the
uh most evil things that the cia has
done as a yale graduate
james angleton who recently resigned as
head of counterintelligence
a yale graduate dozens of yale people
are in the support groups that
the cia uses uh oh richard bissell of
course
richard bissell who was head of perhaps
i shouldn't admit this
if you are uh yale people yourselves
richard bissell
was not only a graduate of this
university but he taught here
which trained him to plan and lead
the bay of pigs operation i i
intentionally forgot to mention that i i
think
uh the support groups the uh the
conduits
full of yale people all over uh
frederick hillis who is the vice
president of yale university press
head of a conduit for the cia
morris hadley son of a former yale
president
whose picture is no doubt among us here
was head of the rubicon foundation
another
yale cia conduit
and then perhaps the foremost example
one tracy barnes
who was the a high
up in the very uh office of the domestic
operations
department of the cia whose operations
we are
talking about here today tracy barnes
served in that office from roughly 1962
to 1967
when he retired he retired
to yale university his old alma mater
and it didn't it seemed he didn't retire
all that much either either
he became a special assistant to kingman
brewster in the office of the
president's
presidency specializing in
community relations whatever that may be
but you can be sure that
he came out of the heart of the cia into
the heart
of academia at the time
of growing student turmoil
right through the days of may 1970
when yale was a focus of some
discontent uh and during
this whole time until 1971 you had a
trained spy and counterintelligence
agent sitting at the right hand of the
president of the university
now i i don't wish by mentioning all
this to be uncharitable to this
great institution that has uh let us use
their buildings
so on today but i do think that in the
discussion of domestic
operations we ought to be aware that
all kinds of institutions have been and
are being used
by the cia in the carrying out of its uh
operations people don't have to be
carrying daggers uh to be spooks
uh there are three parts of the cia
operation that i want to
get to but i want to make one one broad
point
beforehand which frank donner has
touched on
which is that we all ought to know that
the cia has always been mixed up
in domestic activity right from the
beginning
uh and there shouldn't have been any
doubt in in any of our minds
uh that it was uh in just the last week
doing
some casual reading in preparation for
this conference i came up with
50 instances which are published
or verified in some other way of the cia
operating
in a clandestine secret
underhanded way in the united states
uh and it uh when one of these things
gets exposed and the new york times
stands up in righteous indignation uh
we shouldn't uh think this just happened
that there are 9 000 files
uh on uh anti-war people in this country
uh or that even that the new york times
has just discovered it this has always
been going on
uh the cia after all if we will
think past our civic lessons for for
just a moment obviously has to have
the entire machinery to operate in this
country it has to recruit people in this
country
and once these people are recruited uh
it has to decide who is not to be
recruited keep a file on them too
uh once they're recruited and they are
people who are in the agency they have
to check on these people to make sure
that uh
they are not running over to to the
russians every week uh presumably also
to make sure that they're not uh
drunks and homosexuals whatever else the
agency doesn't like
um it does keep a watch on
foreign officials who are stationed in
this country it does talk to people
americans who have been overseas and
come back and it does keep a filing
system
for all of these uh and not just nine
thousand
uh easily thirty five thousand according
to one
former uh uh officer of the cia
uh but plugged into a computer that
registers uh indeed millions
uh and it does have field offices all
over this country 36 that they own up to
you can pick up the phone book and call
them in 36 cities of this
country uh and uh who knows
what other operations they may have so
it's obvious that they have the
machinery here
and it's obviously the obvious that they
have the interest here in operating
domestically
we have known practically since the
beginning of the cia stories keep coming
out and out and out in 1954
for example congress investigated the
cia's
spying on owen lattimore when owen
lattimore was a target
of senator mccarthy uh the cia
was tailing lattimore around the country
finding out what he was doing
and this became public in 1954. in 1961
we learned all about the bay of pigs and
the support system that
the cia had built up here in this
country in uh
in louisiana in florida uh army uh
training cia training bases uh
practically throughout the south
uh and uh community use of community
people
uh especially in florida for for this
operation
uh in 1966 we found out that cia was
working through
michigan state university and through
mit and other universities in an expose
that ramparts
gave us followed the very next year with
an expose of
the cia using the national student
association
uh and that too triggered uh stories
about how it was using
at least a hundred separate uh
foundations in this country as conduits
for its money
uh and then watergate uh we saw again
uh uh watergate that the cia had been
used
uh in the houston plan that it was not
an accidental addendum to the houston
plan
which meant all kinds of illegal
operations here in this country
but it was a central part of the houston
plan and richard helms was most
cooperative
in putting this all together and you can
be sure that little tom charles houston
was not the man who put this houston
plan together
seems much more likely that some higher
up intelligence source
perhaps defense department or as i like
to think cia
was really responsible for the
organization of the houston plan
a plan which we should all remind
ourselves was never rescinded and whose
operations were in fact carried out
uh in the years after 1970
when it was supposedly disbanded we
learned about
cia doing that during watergate we
learned how that they
they had participated in the burglary of
ellsberg psychiatrist office in the
interrogation of deed of beard
surveillance for uh the miami convention
uh and we learned that the the cia in
fact
provided cover and documents identity
documents for the
watergate uh burglary itself
all that for 10 years now we've been
hearing about what the cia has been
doing in this country and people are
still shocked and surprised and
the new york times can still have an
editorial of great indignation
when we learn that there are 9 000 files
uh kept of
anti-war demonstrators and leaders of
course they had files
it is it is long past now the time for
us to be shocked and surprised that they
had files of course they had the files
and of course they were using them
uh it is not a matter of
of shock the offended innocence
especially of the liberal community gets
under my skin a bit
anger outrage yes i think that's
legitimate
but let us not be uh innocent and
surprised and shocked any longer
uh to discover that these things are
going on they have gone on they are
going on and they will continue to go on
now let me then turn to the three
specific areas that i want to talk about
uh each one fairly briefly
[Music]
these three areas i pick because it
seems to me they document
the basic nature
of the cia and its primary function
the first function is the survival
function the sheer task of
self-protection
of bureaucratic hegemony of staying
alive
of having a job of having an agency in
fact
and i take as an example
of the carrying out of that function the
cia's
participation uh in the assassination of
john kennedy in 1963.
the second function is a
repressive function that is to say the
cia
operates as a political police uh in in
part and parcel
with uh the rest of the machinery of
state repression
uh and the example of this that i tend
to touch on
is the suppression and disruption of the
new left in the
1960s and the third area
the third function of the cia is its
corporate
function which is to say it's enmeshment
with the business establishment of this
country
particularly the multinational
corporations and the most interesting
example of this is the recent story
about
cia and the empire of howard hughes
so first to take the survival function
of the cia and the kennedy
assassinations
now uh
mr marx does not believe that that there
was a
uh official participation uh
by the cia in this assassination
although it may have been
unofficial and uh various
loose operatives may have snuck down to
dallas
my attitude is that it was perfectly
consistent for us to believe although
the evidence is is by no means all in
to believe that the cia had
in its own self-interest a survival
function in dallas in 1963.
there are lots of reasons why it did not
like
john kennedy his entire
realm of policies uh was probably
anathema to many of the
top cia people but i don't think that
that is uh
even as crucial as kennedy's threat to
the very survival of the cia
in and remember now that there were
sweeping changes going on
at the cia in 1963 uh it had been
disgraced by the bay of pigs
fiasco and kennedy had vowed at the time
that he would establish much greater
control
white house control over the cia
operations
it was being reorganized during the
summer of 1963
uh according to a kennedy plan which was
to have abolished certain bureaus and
put other functions
elsewhere in the intelligence community
it was brought on the carpet in 1963 by
kennedy
uh when they lied to him about the
participation of frederick berghorn
uh if you will recall that barghorn
another yale
person a professor at this university
who
had gotten picked up by the russians at
a time of very delicate negotiations uh
toward the
test ban treaty and uh ci assured
kennedy that barghorn was innocent
kennedy assured khrushchev they let him
go
barghoutin comes into the white house
and kennedy says we're terribly
apologetic he said nothing to apologize
for i was working for the cia
and uh kennedy uh was apparently
outraged
over this deception uh
at the same time the cia's cuban
operations were being curtailed
by the kennedy administration and at
least four raids that i know were made
by
fbi and police upon cia
training areas in florida and louisiana
during 1963 trying to undercut the cia
still ongoing
interest in cuba at the same time the
southeast asian operations
were being threatened and to top it all
it was in 1963 that kennedy said
not long before the trip to dallas that
he was going to splinter the cia in a
thousand pieces
and scatter it to the winds now that was
the danger to the agency in
november of 1963 in
december of 1963 there was no more
danger
the ci the withdrawal program that
kennedy had begun
in vietnam was halted the cia was
permitted to reactivate its bases
in florida and to stage continued raids
upon
cuba in fact as uh mr marx has
documented in his book
the cia was then after this date allowed
to contract
with general dynamics for a special
super high-speed
hydrofoil boat that could be used
between florida
and cuba for the cia's mysterious
purposes
the ci the black operations of the cia
were expanded in southeast asia in laos
with continued and greater overflights
of china
chinese claimed to have shot down 19
u-2s between
1964 and 1969 and who knows how many
others were operating that they did not
shoot down
and all of the schemes to to reorganize
the cia
were also halted in december of 1963
and the cia head was brought back into
the good graces
of the new president lyndon johnson uh
and
john mcconne was one of the most
important people in the first few days
in the reorganization of the white house
under johnson
which is not all of that which is not to
say that
the cia shot john kennedy
but simply to point out on the old latin
principle
of cui bono to whose advantage
the cia would seem to have had a lot to
benefit
from the removal of john kennedy at that
particular time
there are lots of other clues and hints
about the cia's connections in dallas
uh some of them i trust will be gone
into by experts greater than i
this afternoon after our workshops uh
at the uh in the auditorium but i think
it helps to
to to think of it in the cui bono
framework
of who benefited before and afterward
from that uh instance of the cia at work
now the second instance we are on
somewhat firmer grounds
here the political function of the cia
its repressive function as part of the
state machinery against the
new left in the 1960s and 70s
the cia only one of many groups active
in this
and it's hard to isolate who was a cia
agent and who was only an fbi agent who
was drug enforcement and whatnot
uh hence a lot of stories that you hear
people say i know that so-and-so was a
cia agent
uh are are simply unprovable
and i keep running against up against
this time and time again
but certain things are obvious
one is that the cia took an interest in
student affairs
we know this we know this from the nsa
we also know that uh the cia
no doubt established uh young americans
for freedom there seems to be no
question about that
uh it's part of its uh interest to
countermand the left william buckley cia
agent
was one of the founders of the yaf
excuse me robert bennett
a cia agent was a founder
douglas caddy uh a cia operative was
another
uh founder uh and uh of course uh
the fellow who drew up the the houston
plan tom charles houston
was president of yaf cia obviously cared
about what was going on
uh in in the political student world
uh and hence we can we can be sure
that what little examples we have of the
cia in action
uh is just the tip of the dagger the
very edge of the cloak of what we know
cia must have been doing for example we
know
that there was a cia agent in new york
city for four years
operating out of a bureau of more than
25 people
and that it was engaged in wiretapping
and bugging
surveillance and photography disruptions
provocations
and assembling files uh he
uh has admitted that he was only one of
uh
many agencies operating at the time but
he said with some
note of pride that we had the manpower
and we had the money and that's no doubt
true
if if there is a 750 million dollar
budget for the cia
more or less acknowledged how much more
can the cia be having
and how much can it then spread around
which the drug enforcement agency and
the local red squads are not able to do
it had the money we can be sure we know
that 10 cia
agents infiltrated left groups in
washington dc and that
one of them undercover as a hippie
he says burned two churches in the
washington area
we know that the cia was used for 40
psychological assessments as they called
them in their
shorthand of anti-war leaders
that it was being used as
hunt used the the cia for a profile of
ellsberg
so at least 40 of these psychological
assessments were made
on the left at the time we know
that the cia followed anyone with even
faintly leftist credentials who went
overseas
that being something that they regarded
as their province
and if anyone went to uh algeria or
lebanon or
vietnam uh or especially cuba
they were sure to be trailed
by the cia and followed when they got
back to see what kind of connections
they made here on the home scene
we know also that there were cia goon
squads
operating during that time we know that
people paid for and organized by the cia
were used to beat up
war protesters in new york city in
washington dc
we know that cia goon squads according
to the
local police were used to break into and
trash movement offices in los
angeles and in colombia south carolina
uh and and these are the nearest
outlines of what we know the cia
did what what other agencies did mr
donner has pointed to
but this is this what we know about just
the cia
and it seems clear that from these clues
the cia was operating in this country
for
at least seven eight years uh and uh
presumably still operating
to uh try to destroy the left movement
in america uh it did not
uh thankfully succeed in that but it did
accomplish at least part of its goals uh
the parts of the movement were
fragmented
uh people did grow to distrust each
other
uh expensive court cases the openness of
the new left
was was destroyed by the government uh
created paranoia
and the the warmth and affection that
had been
characteristic of the new left at the
beginning became
twisted by government-inspired
violence and provocateurs the
last example of the cia at work
its corporate function is
is one that we saw through the howard
hughes caper
uh but uh one that we obviously know
exists the the coziness between the
multinationals
who have their far-flung empires that
they like to have protected
and the cia which is very interested in
having cover
in all of these far flung points of
empire
the howard hughes operation is to me
particularly interesting because i take
it to be an example
not simply of the use of the cia
of business by the cia but the takeover
of a corporation by the cia i believe
that the evidence indicates that the
howard hughes empire
has become a corporate entity in service
to the cia and the cia people are
operating at the top levels of that
empire
you may remember that it was in 1970 at
thanksgiving that the great revolution
took place
in the howard hughes empire and robert
mayhew was kicked out
subsequently and hughes was sent off to
the to the bahamas to vegetate
subsequent to that a new police force
was
took over all of howard hughes's
operations at the casinos and elsewhere
a police force called intertel made up
of intelligence people out of washington
with
lots of cia people all up and down it
secondly a new
pr lobbying group was taken
was used by the howard hughes people in
washington which was the robert mullin
company uh which was a cia cover that
began
just after this coup in 1970 the howard
hughes empire
went to this cia cover
one of its vice presidents at the time
was that
retired cia man e howard hunt
a third thing that happened at the same
time was that an agreement was signed
with the cia for 250 million dollars
to build this submarine operation that
would scoop up the soviet
uh sub off the pacific floor uh
at the same time new officers came into
control of the hughes aircraft company
uh which is now according to time
studded
with former ranking military and cia
officers
uh one of whom is a.d whelan who is the
new president
of hughes aircraft corporation and an
xcia
man uh and this at the same time the cia
expanded its office
in of all places las vegas nevada
uh which you would have thought was
somewhat far removed from
its normal concern about its agents
abroad and you wouldn't have thought
there were many
soviet spies there yet it is now said to
be the second biggest office
outside of langley virginia
it is no doubt an unusual move by the
cia to take over a corporation
uh and uh i i cannot give you uh
a great deal in the way of proof beyond
those those suggestive uh items
uh but but think of it for a moment the
cia by taking over the hughes empire
gets a privately held company without
public accountability with the built-in
machinery and a reputation
for secrecy uh it gets a gambling
network an enormous gambling network
to launder money and to connect it with
the uh world of organized crime which it
has always been
connected with and it makes a very neat
interlock
through this gambling enterprise it gets
a major defense contractor
with which it can keep tabs about what's
going on in military intelligence and
under which it can build any kind of
gadgetry it needs to in its operations
it gets a business that is established
around the world
and which according to the los angeles
police is already
used as a cover to pay
uh agents around the world the cia
agents
uh it gets a complex of divisions in the
hughes empire
air west an airline that wants to go
international and
may be the sub the successor to the
airlines that the cia has had whose
cover has been blown
and it gets a an ocean mining company
that it uses
to build the submarine operation and so
on
in short cia gets a perfect machinery
for its operations out of the hughes
empire
and the likelihood that it has done so
it should not be surprising since we
know
of the coziness with the business world
and the cia
for some time those that i take as the
three revealing functions about the cia
the survival function the repressive
function
uh and the corporate function there may
be others but i think with those three
you get a handle
on on what the cia is up to and how it
operates
and you can fit in anything new that
comes along in the headlines
uh into that framework uh if if we read
that the cia
funds the behavior institute at ucla
then that's that's easy to to reconcile
uh
with its uh repressive uh function
uh or that uh it had a uh a role
in uh inter arm cove's uh sale
of arms to the middle east in recent
months well interarmco is a cia
operation and we see there that it's
working its corporate function
sending folks over to protect the fuel
lines
of the middle east has got to be in the
in corporate interests
now to understand the cia in this way to
get a handle on it
i hope you uh you should
let me make one final point which is uh
that i try i'm not meaning to excuse or
justify
its operations i should say simply and
clearly
that there's no question about where i
stand the cia should be abolished
there's there seems to be no way that a
right-thinking person
could could believe otherwise uh if by
chance there
are valuable functions that it may
perform
i would have to be proven that but let's
say that there is a satellite going
around the world that only the cia can
read
and that satellite would tell which
countries are going to be starving next
year
and would prepare us to send food
perhaps that is a beneficent function
that's easily absorbed into the state
department or some other machinery
there is no uh justification for the
offensive and
obscene uh and unnecessary operations uh
of the cia not
not that if it would automatically solve
everything if we could abolish the cia
i wouldn't want you to think that that
would be a great delusion to go away
from this conference with
it would not cleanse the american system
if there were no more
cia there would still be dozens of other
agencies
at work in ways obvious and subtle
to diminish our liberties and we would
have to step
up our operations to try to identify
and to squelch those as well but it
would be a start
to work to eliminate the cia a start
worth working for
and considering the cia's operations uh
particularly in the religious and
political
and educational institutions i should
think that we could say that
the elimination of the cia would be a
would strike a blow
for god for country and for yale
thank you
[Applause]
for more information on the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest
washington dc 2002
this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut